Our broadcast this month has the theme
“Cherish Your Privilege of Prayer.”
Do you think it’s appropriate
to label prayer as a miracle?
Miracles are described
in our New World Translation
“Glossary of Bible Terms”
as “actions or phenomena
“that surpass all powers
“known to humans and are attributed
to a supernatural agency.”
Does prayer fit that description?
The moment you say a prayer,
your innermost thoughts and feelings
are communicated instantly to the Creator
from wherever you are
—even if you pray silently.
That’s certainly
beyond any power that humans know.
Therefore, the fact that a human
can call out to God in prayer
and be heard by him
is truly a miracle.
It’s only
by the undeserved kindness of Jehovah
that we can approach
his heavenly throne in prayer.
Today our lives are very complicated
and, in some cases, very troubled.
Whether young or old, there are times
we may feel overwhelmed with our problems.
At other times,
we may simply feel alone and helpless.
What can we do?
The apostle Paul says that prayer will help.
Please open your Bible to Philippians 4:6
and listen
to his spirit-inspired recommendations:
“Do not be anxious over anything,
“but in everything by prayer and supplication
“along with thanksgiving,
let your petitions be made known to God.”
So Paul is saying
that in all circumstances of life,
prayer is essential.
While no one around us
can see the inner struggles we may be having,
Jehovah sees them.
What will he do?
Let’s read verse 7:
“And the peace of God
that surpasses all understanding
“will guard your hearts
and your mental powers
by means of Christ Jesus.”
This incomparable “peace of God”
is an unusual tranquillity
enjoyed by Jehovah’s dedicated servants,
even in the most trying circumstances.
Have you felt that inner peace
that results
from intimate communication with Jehovah?
How much we benefit from prayer
is closely related to the strength
of our personal relationship with Jehovah.
A key factor in that relationship
is found at Psalm 37:3:
“Trust in Jehovah and do what is good;
reside in the earth,
and act with faithfulness.”
Likely you’d agree that when we need
to talk to someone about our worries,
we go to a trusted friend.
Why?
It’s because we’ve developed
a relationship with him.
He knows us and our situation,
and we know we can count on him.
More than ever,
we need
a close personal relationship with Jehovah.
For that to be possible, we must be convinced
that Jehovah knows
who we are and that he understands us
—our situation, our worries,
our concerns, and our needs.
Notice what Jehovah promises
in verses 4 and 5:
“Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,
“and he will grant you
the desires of your heart.
“Commit your way to Jehovah;
rely on him, and he will act in your behalf.”
Jehovah does know who we are.
He understands us better than anyone else,
even better than we understand ourselves.
He invites us to trust him,
and he promises to act in our behalf.
The miracle of prayer lets us experience
Jehovah’s love in a truly intimate way.
Our Father personally
takes the time to listen to us;
he has not delegated that to anyone else.
However, you might be wondering,
‛Why would the Creator
of the universe want to listen to me?’
The inspired answer at 1 Peter 5:7 says:
“Because he cares for you.”
Your determination to keep doing
the best you can to serve him
in spite of all the problems you face
endears you to him.
He feels for you and is eager to help.
How does that make you feel?
At Psalm 116:1, it says:
“I love Jehovah
“because he hears my voice,
my pleas for help.”
Even though we can’t see him listening to us,
it’s as if we feel
Jehovah’s loving arms around us when we pray.
As a result, the more we pray,
the more our love and trust in him grows.
What else will help us
to build our love
and trust in our God, Jehovah?
It’s more than recognizing
that he hears our prayers.
We must be convinced
that he answers our prayers.
What evidence do we have
that Jehovah answers prayers?
Let’s look at some
specific answers to prayers,
both past and present.
Open your Bible to 2 Chronicles chapter 20.
When Judah was threatened
by the combined forces
of Ammon and Moab
and the mountainous region of Seir,
King Jehoshaphat
humbly prayed for Jehovah’s help.
In verse 12, he prayed:
“O our God,
will you not execute judgment on them?
“For we are powerless
“before this large crowd
that is coming against us;
“and we do not know what we should do,
but our eyes are toward you.”
What was Jehovah’s answer?
There was no voice from heaven.
Jehovah caused a prophet to speak up.
Verse 15 says:
“Here is what Jehovah says to you,
“‘Do not be afraid or be terrified
because of this large crowd,
for the battle is not yours but God’s.’”
Then verse 17 continues:
“You will not need to fight this battle.
“Take your position, stand still,
and see the salvation
of Jehovah in your behalf.”
Did you note the formula?
Jehovah’s dedicated servant
is facing a serious problem.
He prays specifically,
and then he remains attentive to the answer.
The answer may have seemed
strange to Jehoshaphat.
Jehovah didn’t provide a battle plan.
As strategies go, just walking out
to meet the enemy
doesn’t sound like a very good one.
But Jehoshaphat discerned
that this was the answer from Jehovah,
and he let it direct his actions.
What happened?
Jehovah fought for Judah
by striking confusion
into the ranks of the enemy
so that they slaughtered one another.
Jehoshaphat’s prayer was answered
in a mighty way.
We have examples in the first century
of collective prayers being answered.
One occasion was when King Herod
was out to gain the favor of the Jews,
so he had the apostle Peter imprisoned
and placed under heavy guard.
What would the congregation do?
Acts 12:5 gives us the answer:
“So Peter was being kept in the prison,
but the congregation
was intensely praying to God for him.”
Did Jehovah answer their prayers
in behalf of Peter?
The account in verses 7-11 tells us
that an angel of Jehovah
led Peter out of jail
and delivered him to safety.
Imagine how these events must have drawn
the Christians in Jerusalem closer to Jehovah
when they saw
that he had answered their prayers.
What about today?
Consider the example
of our brothers in South Korea.
Over the years,
more than 19,000 of our brothers
have been imprisoned
as conscientious objectors
to military service.
Did you personally pray
in behalf of these brothers
that they might endure in their faith
or that they might be released from prison
if it was Jehovah’s will?
We’re sure that you did.
In fact, many of you prayed
for these brothers by name,
just as the congregation in the first century
prayed in behalf of Peter.
With what result?
In 2018, a series
of court rulings in South Korea
finally recognized conscientious objection
to military service for religious reasons
as a fundamental human right,
and our brothers
were gradually released
from their prison bonds.
What do you think?
Did Jehovah hear our prayers
in behalf of these dear brothers?
As a worldwide brotherhood,
there can be no doubt
that our incessant prayers to Jehovah
were a major factor
in these marvelous developments,
and we praise and thank Jehovah
that he’s heard our prayers.
What does this review
of how Jehovah answered the prayers
of his servants
in the past and present do for us?
Doesn’t it build confidence that Jehovah
is listening to and acting on
the prayers of his people?
The apostle John had that confidence.
He wrote at 1 John 5:14:
“And this is the confidence
that we have toward him,
“that no matter what we ask
according to his will,
he hears us.”
But now the question is:
When was the last time
that Jehovah answered
one of your personal prayers?
We spend much time on learning
how to pray and what to pray for,
but do we put forth enough effort
in identifying the answers to our prayers?
For us to have the closeness to Jehovah,
we must be certain that he’s listening
and responding to our personal prayers.
It may not always be readily discernible
just how some prayers are answered.
So, what can we do?
Take time to meditate on Jehovah’s response
to your prayerful requests.
If you’re married,
freely discuss matters
that you have prayed for in common
and how Jehovah
may be answering those prayers.
Be observant and alert to things
that are happening around you,
and learn to connect these things
with the answers to your prayers.
Make your prayers more specific,
and you’ll become
more keenly aware of Jehovah’s answers
—even though they may be subtle.
Identifying your answered prayers
will make Jehovah more real to you.
This process
of identifying answers to our prayers
should be learned early on
in one’s spiritual development.
We cannot take it
for granted that our children
or our Bible students
will connect the answers
they receive to the prayers they’ve offered.
One Witness said,
“I find that people feel closer to God
“if I help them to recognize
answers to their prayers.”
What if we can’t identify
the answer to one of our prayers?
Does that mean
it wasn’t according to Jehovah’s will?
Not necessarily.
There are two important factors
that might be involved.
One is that Jehovah knows
the best time and way
to answer our prayers.
He takes all matters into consideration.
The answer may not come
according to our timetable, but it will come.
So we must be patient
and keep looking for the answer.
The second factor that Jehovah considers
is the issue raised by Satan
regarding man’s integrity.
Listen again to the challenge Satan makes
as recorded at Job 1:10, 11:
“Have you not put up a protective hedge
“around him and his house
and everything he has?
“You have blessed the work of his hands,
“and his livestock
has spread out in the land.
“But, for a change, stretch out your hand
“and strike everything he has,
and he will surely
curse you to your very face.”
Jehovah permitted this issue
to be raised out of love
for his intelligent creatures.
He permitted Job to undergo a test
by Satan before the entire universe.
Jehovah gives his creatures the privilege
of proving the Devil a liar
and of removing the slander
not only from God’s name
but also from their own.
So Jehovah, seeing the entire issue,
may allow his servants to endure trials.
But that doesn’t mean
he’s not answering
the prayer of the afflicted.
When we are under trial,
we may have prayed for relief,
but we may have also prayed:
“Let your name be sanctified.”
We must remain convinced that Jehovah
will not simply answer a prayer;
he will provide the best answer.
Isn’t it true that
when we maintain our integrity,
even through serious illness,
it can be a tremendous witness to others?
That was the case with Jerod Septer.
God’s Word says:
“Remember, then, your Grand Creator
“in the days of your youth,
before the days of distress come.”
And “the days of distress”
—they arrived early on Jerod at 11.
Jerod was diagnosed
with lymphoma cancer in the middle of 1991.
We started trying
to figure out how we could get him
the treatment that he needed,
of course, but in no way would we accept
a blood transfusion, and neither would Jerod.
When Jerod was in the hospital,
Child Protective Services
did investigate us.
They were concerned there was negligence.
It was just adding to the pain.
The way it turned out,
they backed completely away from that.
They realized that we hadn’t been negligent.
So as we faced different situations,
we’d pray at the time,
not to have miraculous answers,
but for Jehovah to open our eyes
and to be able to find things.
And it seemed as though
he was really directing us,
so that we could take care
of ourselves spiritually
through this situation as well as take care
of Jerod’s medical needs.
I remember
many times falling on my knees
and praying and thinking: ‘This is it.
I’m tested beyond what I can bear.’
And Jehovah would strengthen me.
And someone would come,
or they would say something.
And they fed us.
The brother made a schedule, and he said,
“You’re going to feed these friends.”
And the brother’s instructions were:
“You don’t bring it
and just drop off the food.
You stay with those friends.”
It made me cry
—the love and the care that we experienced.
One time, I remember
the hallways of this hospital
—1,500 miles (2,400 km) away from our home—
started filling up with people.
To me, that was answering prayers too.
It was hard for us
to get out of the hospital,
so they recorded talks.
They would look us in the eye,
and they’d say:
“Now, you need to listen to this.
It will keep you strong.”
Jerod was worried about us,
and he made it clear
that he was going to be fine.
He just didn’t know if we were going to be.
He died
in June of 1992.
He was at home.
And the last thing he said to us was,
“Work hard so we can all be together again.”
It’s numbing
because it’s almost like
you’re living a nightmare
because you never think
that those things will happen to you,
but it did.
I didn’t want people to see me cry.
I didn’t want pity, and I didn’t—
Because of that
—those negative feelings—
my imagination ran wild.
What helped me, I know,
was Gary putting into my heart and mind
that this is a fight.
It’s been a challenge for all mankind.
‘If you make it hard on them,
they won’t love you’
—Satan said that
about Jehovah and individuals.
So I would be giving in to that.
The strong feelings I had
and my sorrow almost made me stop.
I prayed a lot
to go back to the Kingdom Hall.
The congregation cried;
they lost a little boy.
It wasn’t just Gary and Beth.
They lost a little boy.
They cried,
and I didn’t feel alone.
And then we hugged; we cried together.
It really benefited us to get right back
into spiritual focus
and to get our minds off ourselves.
And I could’ve given in
to my pain and thought,
‘Well, I’m too heartbroken.’
It made me have more joy
because I realized that now they have a hope.
People around us were vital
—the support system Jehovah has—
and his Word, his spirit.
Jehovah answered those prayers.
Our goal was really to stay
in the full-time ministry
(maybe doing something else),
but we never, ever thought
we would be in the circuit work.
But to have our daughter
working with her husband in the circuit work
—it’s almost hard
to believe that it’s happening.
We look forward to seeing Jerod again,
having him back with us.
So I’m waiting,
and I know I’m not going to be disappointed.
How encouraging to know that Gary and Beth
are able to take vacation time
to travel occasionally
to see their daughter and her husband,
who are also serving in the traveling work.
And did you notice how Gary, Beth, and Jerod
felt Jehovah’s loving support as they prayed
throughout this heart-wrenching trial?
They asked for wisdom
when seeking medical treatment for Jerod.
Jehovah put his arms around them and listened
when they felt overwhelmed
with grief and negative feelings.
He strengthened
Jerod’s hope in the resurrection
and helped Brother and Sister Septer
stay spiritually strong.
Can there be any doubt
that Jehovah was answering their prayers?
Doesn’t that strengthen our conviction
that Jehovah will also answer Jerod’s prayer
that they all will be together again?
No, Jehovah didn’t miraculously cure Jerod.
But through his endurance and strong faith,
Jerod gave a witness to the universe
that even a child that trusts in Jehovah
can prove his loyalty to death.
Now, other situations
may turn out differently
and not end up in death.
If an individual feels that relief
was because of Jehovah’s intervention,
he should certainly give thanks.
However, we must recognize that Jehovah knows
the best way to handle matters
so that it results in honor to his name
and to the lasting good of his servants.
Finally, it’s worth mentioning that the Bible
often connects
our remaining spiritually alert
with our need to pray.
At Matthew 26:41,
Jesus said:
“Keep on the watch and pray continually.”
At 1 Peter 4:7,
Peter wrote:
“But the end of all things has drawn close.
“Therefore, be sound in mind,
and be vigilant with a view to prayers.”
Indeed, our prayers are so important.
Our personal prayers will help us
to remain spiritually alert
and active in God’s service
as we await the great tribulation
that lies just ahead of us.
So in summary, our prayers to Jehovah
reveal the closeness
of our relationship with him
and the degree of our dependence upon him.
They show the trueness of our faith,
the depth of our devotion,
and the genuineness of our appreciation.
Our prayers also help us
to remain spiritually alert
as we endure these last days
before the great tribulation.
We’ll be drawn even closer to Jehovah
when we learn to recognize
his answers to our prayers.
Yes, we can be assured that Jehovah
will not fail in giving us
the desires of our heart
as we continue rendering him sacred service.
May we all cherish our marvelous,
miraculous privilege of prayer.